updated model persistor docs and aws persistor (#6799)
RasaHQ/rasa: docs/docs/model-storage.mdx

id: model-storage
sidebar_label: Model Storage
title: Model Storage
abstract: |
  After you've trained a model for your assistant, you can use it to run your

>   bot.

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing, as it doesn't really describe what model storage does

---

You can load your trained model
in three different ways:

1. Load the model from your local disk (see [Load Model from Disk](./model-storage.mdx#load-model-from-disk))

> 2. Fetch the model from your own http server (see [Load Model from Server](./model-storage.mdx#load-model-from-server))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Fetch the model from your own HTTP server (see [Load Model from Server](./model-storage.mdx#load-model-from-server))
```

3. Fetch the model from cloud storage like S3 (see [Load Model from Cloud](./model-storage.mdx#load-model-from-cloud))

Loading the model from your local disk will be used as a fallback if you

> don't specify how a model should be loaded.

Reviewer: Can we rephrase this to make it sound more like a default than a fallback (this here feels like it implies you need to specify)

Reviewer: the intro to the next section is much clearer about this!

## Load Model from Disk

By default models will be loaded from your local disk. You can specify the path
to your model with the `--model` parameter:

```bash
rasa run --model models/20190506-100418.tar.gz
```

If you want to load the latest model in a directory, you can specify
a directory instead of a file:

```bash
rasa run --model models/
```

> Rasa will check all the models in that directory and load the one which was trained
> most recently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rasa Open Source will check all the models in that directory and load the one that was trained
most recently.
```

> Rasa will assume `models/` to be the default model directory and
> will use it in case no `--model` argument is specified. The two following calls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't specify a `--model` argument, Rasa Open Source will look for models in the  `models/` directory. The two following calls
```

will load the same model:

```bash
# this command will load the same model
rasa run --model models/
# ... as this command (using defaults)
rasa run
```

## Load Model from Server

You can configure the Rasa Open Source server to regularly fetch
a model from a server and deploy it.

#### Configuration of Rasa Open Source

You can configure the HTTP server to fetch models from another URL
by adding it to your `endpoints.yml`:

```yaml-rasa title="endpoints.yml"
models:
  url: http://my-server.com/models/default
  wait_time_between_pulls: 10   # In seconds, optional, default: 100
```

> The server will query `url` for a zipped model every `wait_time_between_pulls`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server will query the `url` for a zipped model every `wait_time_between_pulls`
```

seconds.

> If you want to pull the model just once from the server, you can set the time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to pull the model only when starting up the server, you can set the time
```

between pulls to `null`:

```yaml-rasa title="endpoints.yml"
models:
  url: http://my-server.com/models/default
  wait_time_between_pulls: null  # fetches model only once
```

> #### Configuration of your server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Configuration of Your Server
```

Reviewer: what about "How to Configure Your Server" ? would be more straightforward i think

Rasa Open Source will send a `GET` request to the URL you specified in the

> `endpoints.yml`, e.g. in the above examples this would be
> `http://my-server.com/models/default`. You can use any URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`endpoints.yml`, e.g. `http://my-server.com/models/default` in the above examples.
You can use any URL.
```

The `GET` request will contain an `If-None-Match` header that contains the
model hash of the last model it downloaded. An example request from Rasa Open
Source to your server would look like this:

```bash
curl --header "If-None-Match: d41d8cd98f00b204e9800998ecf8427e" http://my-server.com/models/default
```

The response of your server to this `GET` request should be one of these:

> - return a status code of `200`, a zipped Rasa Model and set the `ETag` header in
>   the response to the hash of the model.
> - return a status code of `304` and an empty response if the `If-None-Match`
>   header of the request matches the model you want your server to return.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a status code of `200`, a zipped Rasa Model and set the `ETag` header in
  the response to the hash of the model.
- a status code of `304` and an empty response if the `If-None-Match`
  header of the request matches the model you want your server to return.
```

> Rasa Open Source uses the `If-None-Match` and `ETag` headers fro caching. Setting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rasa Open Source uses the `If-None-Match` and `ETag` headers for caching. Setting
```

the headers will avoid re-downloading the same model over and over, saving
bandwidth and compute resources.

> An example request Rasa might make to your model server looks like this:

Reviewer: ?

Author: just a leftover from the previous version, the example as already further up 🙂

> ## Load Model from Cloud

Reviewer: I thought we were going with `"ing"` style headers?

Author: mhm this was the shortest title that fit on a single line in the right-hand navbar so I went with it, do you think the `-ing` is important here?

Reviewer: I think its easier to read/understand on first glance -- the length of the title is something we should look at again bc its currently wayy too short and not really feasible to shorten all the pages like this 🤔

You can also configure the Rasa server to fetch your model from a remote storage:

```bash
rasa run --model 20190506-100418.tar.gz --remote-storage aws
```

> The zipped model will be downloaded from cloud storage, unzipped and deployed.
> Rasa supports loading models from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The zipped model will be downloaded from cloud storage, unzipped, and deployed.
Rasa supports loading models from:
```

- [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/),
- [Google Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com/storage/),
- [Azure Storage](https://azure.microsoft.com/services/storage/) and
- custom implementations for

>   [Other Remote Storages](./model-storage.mdx#other-remote-storages)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [Other Remote Storages](./model-storage.mdx#other-remote-storages).
```

Also please add `Storages` to typoci

Amazon S3 is supported using the `boto3` package which you need to install
as an additional dependency using `pip3`:
```bash
pip3 install boto3
```

For Rasa to be able to authenticate and download the model, you need to set the
following environment variables before running any command requiring the storage:

* `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`: environment variable containing your AWS S3 secret access key

* `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`: environment variable containing your AWS S3 access key ID

* `AWS_DEFAULT_REGION`: environment variable specifying the region of your AWS S3 bucket

* `BUCKET_NAME`: environment variable specifying the S3 bucket

* `AWS_ENDPOINT_URL`: The complete URL to use for the AWS S3 requests. You need to
  specify a complete URL (including the "http/https" scheme).

Once all environment variables are set, you can start the Rasa server with
`remote-storage` option set to `aws`:

```bash
rasa run --model 20190506-100418.tar.gz --remote-storage aws
```

### Google Cloud Storage

Google Cloud Storage (GCS) is supported using the `google-cloud-storage` package
which you need to install as an additional dependency using `pip3`:
```bash
pip3 install google-cloud-storage
```

> If you are running Rasa on a Google App Engine and Compute Engine, the auth

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running Rasa on Google App Engine or Compute Engine, the auth
```

credentials are already set up (for the GCS in the same project). In this case,
you can skip setting any additional environment variables.

If you are running locally or on a machine outside of GAE or GCE you need to
provide the authentication details to Rasa manually:

> 1. Checkout the [GCS documentation](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/getting-started#auth-cloud-implicit-python)
>    and follow the descriptions on "Creating a service account" and
>    "Setting the environment variable".
> 2. After you completed the GCS instructions, you should have set an environment
>    variable called `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS` to the path of a service account
>    key file with access to your GCS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check out the [GCS documentation](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/getting-started#auth-cloud-implicit-python)
   and follow the descriptions on "Creating a service account" and
   "Setting the environment variable."
2. After you have completed the GCS instructions, you should have set an environment
   variable called `GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS` to the path of a service account
   key file with access to your GCS.
```

Once all environment variable is set, you can start the Rasa server with
`remote-storage` option set to `gcs`:

```bash
rasa run --model 20190506-100418.tar.gz --remote-storage gcs
```

### Azure Storage

Azure Storage is supported using the `azure-storage-blob` package which you need
to install as an additional dependency using `pip3`:
```bash
pip3 install azure-storage-blob
```

For Rasa to be able to authenticate and download the model, you need to set the
following environment variables before running any command requiring the storage:

* `AZURE_CONTAINER`: environment variable containing your azure container name

* `AZURE_ACCOUNT_NAME`: environment variable containing your azure account name

* `AZURE_ACCOUNT_KEY`: environment variable containing your account key

Once all environment variables are set, you can start the Rasa server with
`remote-storage` option set to `azure`:

```bash
rasa run --model 20190506-100418.tar.gz --remote-storage azure
```

### Other Remote Storages

If you want to use any other Cloud Storage, you can provide your own python

> implementation of the `rasa.nlu.persistor.Persistor` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementation of the [`rasa.nlu.persistor.Persistor`](/reference/rasa/nlu/persistor) class.
```
